HANDOFF.md, before:

# Handoff: 2026-02-02 (Session 39)

## Completed This Session

### Helper Lemma: orthogonal_sum_isIdempotent

**Added** to `AfTests/Jordan/FormallyReal/Spectrum.lean:99-107`:
- `orthogonal_sum_isIdempotent` - sum of orthogonal idempotents is idempotent
- Required for Step 7 of `orthogonal_primitive_peirce_sq` proof

---

## Previous Session (38)

### JordanAlgebra Instance: Matrix/Instance.lean

**Created** `AfTests/Jordan/Matrix/Instance.lean` (126 LOC) with:
- `RealSymmetricMatrix` type alias for `selfAdjoint (Matrix n n ℝ)`
- `JordanAlgebra (RealSymmetricMatrix n)` instance

**Also added to JordanProduct.lean:**
- `jordanMul_add` - bilinearity (right)
- `add_jordanMul` - bilinearity (left)
- `smul_jordanMul` - scalar multiplication (left)
- `jordanMul_smul` - scalar multiplication (right)
- `jordan_identity` - the Jordan identity for matrices

**Key proof technique for Jordan identity:**
```lean
simp only [smul_add, mul_add, add_mul, smul_mul_assoc, mul_smul_comm, smul_smul]
conv_lhs => simp only [Matrix.mul_assoc]
conv_rhs => simp only [Matrix.mul_assoc]
ring_nf; abel
```

---

## Current State

### Jordan Algebra Project
- 9 files, ~870 LOC total
- **1 sorry remaining:**
  - `FormallyReal/Def.lean` - `of_sq_eq_zero` (requires spectral theory)
- Matrix Jordan algebra now has full instance

### Archimedean Closure Project: COMPLETE
- 44 files, 4,943 LOC, 0 sorries

---

## Next Steps

### Immediate (unblocked tasks)
1. `af-j4dq`: Jordan/FormallyReal/Spectrum.lean - Spectral properties
2. `af-dc2h`: Jordan/Matrix/RealHermitian.lean - Additional properties
3. `af-noad`: Jordan/FormallyReal/Square.lean - Square roots

### Deferred
- `af-0xrg`: of_sq_eq_zero - needs architectural decision (spectral theory vs axioms)
- `af-tpm2`: Spectral theory development (P3)

---

## Files Modified This Session

- `AfTests/Jordan/Matrix/JordanProduct.lean` (added bilinearity, Jordan identity)
- `AfTests/Jordan/Matrix/Instance.lean` (NEW - JordanAlgebra instance)
- `HANDOFF.md` (updated)

---

## Sorries

1. `AfTests/Jordan/FormallyReal/Def.lean:58-68` - `of_sq_eq_zero`
   - Proving: single-element property implies sum-of-squares property
   - Status: **Requires spectral theory or ordering axioms**
   - See: Faraut-Korányi "Analysis on Symmetric Cones"

---

## Technical Notes

### Jordan Identity Proof Pattern
The Jordan identity `(A ∘ B) ∘ A² = A ∘ (B ∘ A²)` for matrices:
1. Expand using `jordanMul_def` and `jordanMul_self`
2. Pull scalars through with `smul_mul_assoc`, `mul_smul_comm`
3. Apply `Matrix.mul_assoc` using `conv` to both sides
4. Terms become identical after `ring_nf; abel`

### HermitianMatrix vs RealSymmetricMatrix
- `HermitianMatrix n R` works for general `[Field R] [StarRing R]`
- `RealSymmetricMatrix n` = `selfAdjoint (Matrix n n ℝ)` has `Module ℝ` automatically
- Only RealSymmetricMatrix gets JordanAlgebra instance (over ℝ)

---

## Beads Summary

- 1 task closed this session: `af-dcxu` (JordanAlgebra instance)

---

## Previous Sessions

### Session 37 (2026-01-30)
- Eliminated IsHermitian.jordanMul sorry
- Documented of_sq_eq_zero limitation

### Session 36 (2026-01-30)
- Jordan FormallyReal properties, cone, matrix product (3 files, 269 LOC)

### Session 35 (2026-01-30)
- Jordan algebra core infrastructure (5 files, 460 LOC)

Commit message:

Update HANDOFF.md with Step 4 progress

HANDOFF.md, after:

# Handoff: 2026-02-02 (Session 39)

## Completed This Session

### Helper Lemma: orthogonal_sum_isIdempotent

**Added** to `AfTests/Jordan/FormallyReal/Spectrum.lean:99-107`:
- `orthogonal_sum_isIdempotent` - sum of orthogonal idempotents is idempotent
- Required for Step 7 of `orthogonal_primitive_peirce_sq` proof

**Added** Step 4 to `orthogonal_primitive_peirce_sq` in `Primitive.lean:1113-1114`:
- `hf_in_P0_e : f ∈ PeirceSpace e 0` using `orthogonal_in_peirce_zero`
- `he_in_P0_f : e ∈ PeirceSpace f 0` using `orthogonal_in_peirce_zero horth.symm`

---

## Previous Session (38)

### JordanAlgebra Instance: Matrix/Instance.lean

**Created** `AfTests/Jordan/Matrix/Instance.lean` (126 LOC) with:
- `RealSymmetricMatrix` type alias for `selfAdjoint (Matrix n n ℝ)`
- `JordanAlgebra (RealSymmetricMatrix n)` instance

**Also added to JordanProduct.lean:**
- `jordanMul_add` - bilinearity (right)
- `add_jordanMul` - bilinearity (left)
- `smul_jordanMul` - scalar multiplication (left)
- `jordanMul_smul` - scalar multiplication (right)
- `jordan_identity` - the Jordan identity for matrices

**Key proof technique for Jordan identity:**
```lean
simp only [smul_add, mul_add, add_mul, smul_mul_assoc, mul_smul_comm, smul_smul]
conv_lhs => simp only [Matrix.mul_assoc]
conv_rhs => simp only [Matrix.mul_assoc]
ring_nf; abel
```

---

## Current State

### Jordan Algebra Project
- 9 files, ~870 LOC total
- **1 sorry remaining:**
  - `FormallyReal/Def.lean` - `of_sq_eq_zero` (requires spectral theory)
- Matrix Jordan algebra now has full instance

### Archimedean Closure Project: COMPLETE
- 44 files, 4,943 LOC, 0 sorries

---

## Next Steps

### Immediate (unblocked tasks)
1. `af-j4dq`: Jordan/FormallyReal/Spectrum.lean - Spectral properties
2. `af-dc2h`: Jordan/Matrix/RealHermitian.lean - Additional properties
3. `af-noad`: Jordan/FormallyReal/Square.lean - Square roots

### Deferred
- `af-0xrg`: of_sq_eq_zero - needs architectural decision (spectral theory vs axioms)
- `af-tpm2`: Spectral theory development (P3)

---

## Files Modified This Session

- `AfTests/Jordan/Matrix/JordanProduct.lean` (added bilinearity, Jordan identity)
- `AfTests/Jordan/Matrix/Instance.lean` (NEW - JordanAlgebra instance)
- `HANDOFF.md` (updated)

---

## Sorries

1. `AfTests/Jordan/FormallyReal/Def.lean:58-68` - `of_sq_eq_zero`
   - Proving: single-element property implies sum-of-squares property
   - Status: **Requires spectral theory or ordering axioms**
   - See: Faraut-Korányi "Analysis on Symmetric Cones"

---

## Technical Notes

### Jordan Identity Proof Pattern
The Jordan identity `(A ∘ B) ∘ A² = A ∘ (B ∘ A²)` for matrices:
1. Expand using `jordanMul_def` and `jordanMul_self`
2. Pull scalars through with `smul_mul_assoc`, `mul_smul_comm`
3. Apply `Matrix.mul_assoc` using `conv` to both sides
4. Terms become identical after `ring_nf; abel`

### HermitianMatrix vs RealSymmetricMatrix
- `HermitianMatrix n R` works for general `[Field R] [StarRing R]`
- `RealSymmetricMatrix n` = `selfAdjoint (Matrix n n ℝ)` has `Module ℝ` automatically
- Only RealSymmetricMatrix gets JordanAlgebra instance (over ℝ)

---

## Beads Summary

- 1 task closed this session: `af-dcxu` (JordanAlgebra instance)

---

## Previous Sessions

### Session 37 (2026-01-30)
- Eliminated IsHermitian.jordanMul sorry
- Documented of_sq_eq_zero limitation

### Session 36 (2026-01-30)
- Jordan FormallyReal properties, cone, matrix product (3 files, 269 LOC)

### Session 35 (2026-01-30)
- Jordan algebra core infrastructure (5 files, 460 LOC)
